>> Ifill: A 29-YEAR-OLD N.S.A.
CONTRACTOR CLAIMED
RESPONSIBILITY FOR REVEALING TOP
SECURITY GOVERNMENT SURVEILLANCE
PROGRAMS.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
ON THE "NEWSHOUR" TONIGHT, WE
TALK TO FORMER DIRECTOR OF
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE DENNIS
BLAIR AND DEBATE THE SECURITY
AND PRIVACY ISSUES RAISED BY THE
DISCLOSURE OF THE CLASSIFIED
PROGRAMS.
>> Ifill: WE KICK OFF A WEEK
DEDICATED TO FOOD SECURITY.
TONIGHT, A STORY FROM COSTA RICA
ON THE STRUGGLE TO MAINTAIN
FORESTS WHILE ENCOURAGING
FARMING.
IT'S PART OF OUR SERIES: "FOOD
FOR NINE BILLION."
>> THE MAGIC IS GOING TO COME IN
FIGURING OUT HOW TO VALUE NATURE
IN OUR DECISIONS, HOW TO SEE
NATURE AS AN ASSET.
>> Woodruff: JEFFREY BROWN
RECAPS PRESIDENT OBAMA'S ONE-ON-
ONE TALKS WITH CHINA'S NEW
LEADER AND LOOKS AT WHAT
PROGRESS, IF ANY, THE TWO MADE
ON CYBERSECURITY, NORTH KOREA
AND MORE.
>> Ifill: AND RAY SUAREZ
EXPLORES THE SOMETIMES WILD,
SOMETIMES WEIRD OUTCOMES WHEN
SCIENTISTS EXPERIMENT ON ANIMALS
WITH THE AUTHOR OF
"FRANKENSTEIN'S CAT".
>> IT SURPRISED ME HOW FAR ALONG
THIS TECHNOLOGY WAS: THAT YOU
CAN NOW BUY A GLOW-IN-THE-DARK
GENETICALLY ENGINEERED PET, OR
REMOTE CONTROL A COCKROACH WITH
A KIT YOU CAN BUY ONLINE.
>> Ifill: THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON
TONIGHT'S "NEWSHOUR".
>> Woodruff: THE UPROAR OVER
SWEEPING GOVERNMENT SURVEILLANCE
HAS NOW EXPANDED TO THE SOURCE
OF THE REVELATIONS.
HE'S DEFENDING HIS ACTIONS,
SAYING "THE PUBLIC IS OWED AN
EXPLANATION" ABOUT WHAT'S BEEN
GOING ON.
>> EVEN IF YOU'RE DOING NOTHING
WRONG, YOU'RE BEING WATCHED AND
RECORDED SNEUD THE MAN IS
COLLECTING DATA ON MILLIONS OF
PHONE CALLS AND INTERNET
COMMUNICATIONS.
THE GUARDIAN NEWSPAPER IN LONDON
AND THE "WASHINGTON POST" BROKE
THE STORY LAST WEEK.
ON SUNDAY SNOWDEN PERMITTED THEM
TO MAKE HIS IDENTITY PUBLIC.
HE ALSO MADE A LENGTHY VIDEO
STATEMENT FOR THE GUARDIAN,
PRODUCED BY DOCUMENTARY FILM
MAKER LAURA POITRESS AND
JOURNALIST GLEN GREENWALL.
>> I SITTING AT MY DESK
CERTAINLY HAD THE AUTHORITY TO
WIR TAPE ANYONE FROM YOU OR YOUR
ACCOUNTANT TO A FEDERAL JUDGE TO
EVEN THE PRESIDENT IF I HAD A
PERSONAL EMAIL.
YOU DON'T HAVE TO HAVE DONE
ANYTHING WRONG, YOU SIMPLY HAVE
TO EVENTUALLY FALL UNDER
SUSPICION BY SOMEBODY EVEN BY A
WRONG CALL.
THEN THEY CAN USE THE SYSTEM TO
GO BACK IN TIME AND SCRUTINIZE
EVERY DECISION YOU'VE EVER MADE.
>> SNOWDEN IS 29.
HE BRIEFLY WORKD AS A CONTRACTOR
FOR THE N.S.A., EMPLOYED BY THE
PRIVATE DEFENSE CONSULTING FIRM
BOOS, ALLEN, HAMILTON.
HE SAID HE FELT COMPELLED TO
SPEAK OUT ABOUT WHAT HE CALLS
WRONGDOING.
>> THE MORE YOU TALK ABOUT IT,
THE MORE YOU'RE IGNORED.
YOU'RE TOLD IT'S NOT A PROBLEM
UNTIL YOU REALIZE THAT THESE
THINGS NEED TO BE DETERMINED BY
THE PUBLIC NOT BY HIRED BY THE
GOVERNMENT.
>> HE WAS INTERVIEWED BY THE
GOVERNMENT IN HONG KONG WHERE HE
SAID HE'S SEEKING ASYLUM.
THE FORMER CONTRACTOR INDICATED
THAT HE EXPECTS U.S. AUTHORITY
TO PROSECUTE HIM.
>> YOU CAN'T COME FORWARD
AGAINST THE WORLD'S MOST
POWERFUL INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES
AND BE COMPLETELY FREE FROM
RISK.
BECAUSE THEY'RE SUCH POWERFUL
ADVERSARIES.
NO ONE CAN MEANINGFUL OPPOSE
THEM.
IF THEY WANT TO GET YOU, THEY'LL
GET YOU IN TIME.
>> Woodruff: AT THE WHITE HOUSE
TODAY, SPOKESMAN JAY CARNEY
WOULD NOT DISCUSS SNOWDEN OR THE
CASE.
OTHER TOP OFFICIALS DID SPEAK
OUT OVER THE WEEKEND BEFORE
LEARNING OF SNOWDEN'S IDENTITY.
>> FOR ME IT IS LITERALLY NOT
FIGURATIVELY...
>> Woodruff: ON SATURDAY THE
DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL
INTELLIGENCE, JAMES CLAPPER,
TOLD NBC NEWS THAT THE LEAKS PUT
THE NATION IN DANGER.
>> THIS IS A KEY TOOL FOR
PRESERVING, PROTECTING THE
NATION'S SAFETY AND SECURITY.
>> Woodruff: ON THE SUNDAY TALK
SHOWS THE ISSUE MADE STRANGE
FELLOWS OF LAWMAKERS ACROSS THE
POLITICAL SPECTRUM.
REPUBLICAN CONGRESSMAN MIKE
ROGERS OF MICHIGAN CHAIRS THE
HOUSE INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEE.
>> THESE PROGRAMS THAT ARE
AUTHORIZED BY THE COURT, BY THE
WAY, ONLY FOCUS ON NON-UNITED
STATES PERSONS OVERSEAS.
THAT GETS LOST IN THIS DEBATE.
THIS IS OUR PIECES OF THE
PUZZLE.
YOU HAVE TO HAVE ALL THE PIECES
OF THE PUZZLE TO TRY TO PUT IT
TOGETHER.
THAT'S WHAT WE FOUND WENT WRONG
IN 9/11.
>> Woodruff: CALIFORNIA DEMOCRAT
DIANNE FEINSTEIN CHAIRS THE
SENATE INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEE.
>> HERE'S THE RUB.
THE INSTANCES WHERE THIS HAS
PRODUCED GOOD... HAS DISRUPTED
PLOTS, PREVENTED TERRORIST
ATTACKS IS ALL CLASSIFIED.
THAT'S WHAT'S SO HARD ABOUT
THIS.
>> Woodruff: ANOTHER DEMOCRATIC
SENATOR, MARK UDALL OF COLORADO,
ARGUEDED THE PROGRAMS HAVE GONE
TOO FAR.
>> MY CONCERN IS THIS IS VAST.
IT HASN'T BEEN PROVEN THAT IT
WORKS.
UNIQUELY OF VALUABLE
INTELLIGENCE HASN'T BEEN PROVEN
TO HAVE DISRUPTED PLOTS.
AGAIN IT'S THE SCALE OF THIS
THAT REALLY CONCERNS ME AND THE
FACT THAT THE AMERICAN PUBLIC
DOESN'T KNOW ABOUT IT.
>> Woodruff: AND REPUBLICAN RAND
PAUL OF KENTUCKY INSISTED THE
PROGRAMS ARE A VIOLATION OF
AMERICANS' FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS.
>> GET A WARRANT.
GO AFTER A TERRORIST OR A
MURDERER OR A RAPIST BUT DON'T
TRAWL THROUGH A BILLION PHONE
RECORDS EVERY DAY.
THAT IS UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
IT INVADES OUR PRIVACY.
AND I'M GOING TO BE SEEING IF I
CAN CHALLENGE THIS AT THE
SUPREME COURT LEVEL.
>> Woodruff: SNOWDEN IS BELIEVED
TO BE STILL IN HONG KONG.
IT'S UNCLEAR HOW THE
SEMIAUTONOMOUS CHINESE TERRITORY
WILL HANDLE HIS CASE.
HONG KONG HAS OFFERED ASYLUM TO
OTHERS IN THE PAST.
BUT ALSO HOLDS AN EXTRADITION
TREATY WITH THE UNITED STATES.
FOR MORE ON ALL THIS, WE TURN TO
RETIRED ADMIRAL DENNIS BLAIR.
DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL
INTELLIGENCE IN 2009 AND 2010.
IN THAT POSITION HE OVERSAW THE
ENTIRE INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY
INCLUDING THE N.S.A.
LET ME FIRST ASK YOU ABOUT THIS
QUESTION.
HOW COULD A 29-YEAR-OLD
TECHNICAL ASSISTANT WHO SAYS HE
DIDN'T HAVE A HIGH SCHOOL
DIPLOMA, ONLY WORKED FOR A FEW
YEARS FOR A PRIVATE CONTRACTOR,
HAVE ACCESS TO THIS KIND OF
INFORMATION?
>> WELL, I HAVEN'T READ
EVERYTHING THAT THIS YOUNG MAN
HAS TALKED ABOUT OR PUT OUT,
JUDY.
BUT JUST LISTENING TO PARTS OF
IT HE CLEARLY DID NOT HAVE THE
FULL PICTURE OF THESE PROGRAMS
THAT ARE RUN BY THE INTELLIGENCE
AGENCIES.
SO HE REACTEDDED TO THE LITTLE
PIECE THAT HE KNEW AND HE TOOK A
VERY DANGEROUS ACTION.
>> Woodruff: ARE YOU SAYING YOU
BELIEVE HE'S EMBELLISHING WHAT
HE KNOWS?
>> YES.
IT SOUNDS LIKE HE HAS AN
OVERINFLATED IDEA OF THE POWER
THAT HE HAD AS A LOW-LEVEL
EMPLOYEE.
HE DID NOT UNDERSTAND ALL THE
CHECKS AND BALANCES OR THE
INTENT OF THE PROGRAM.
HE IS MAKING SOME PRETTY WILD,
WILD STAIMGHTS.
BY THE WAY,... STATEMENTS.
BY THE WAY, HE'S VIOLATING LAWS
TO TALK ABOUT THESE PROGRAMS.
SO I DON'T THINK HE'S A TERRIBLY
CREDIBLE WITNESS HERE.
>> Woodruff: IF HE DIDN'T SEE
THAT MUCH, THEN HOW MUCH DAMAGE
IS DONE BY HIS RELEASING OR
REVEALING THIS?
>> I THINK THE SINGLE POINT IN
ALL OF THIS THAT I AGREE WITH,
JUDY, IS THAT THE... WE NEED TO
TAKE SOME OF THE MYSTERY BUT NOT
THE SECRECY OUT OF THE
INTELLIGENCE PROGRAMS THAT WE
USE TO PROTECT AMERICANS.
OUR WHOLE SYSTEM IS SET UP ON
FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES
GATHER INFORMATION FROM
FOREIGNERS, NOT FROM AMERICANS,
OVERSEAS.
OUR DOMESTIC SECURITY AGENCIES,
THE F.B.I., STATE AND LOCAL
POLICE ALL WORK IN THE UNITED
STATES ON THREATS TO AMERICA.
THE PROBLEM IS THE TERRORIST
GROUPS DON'T RECOGNIZE THIS FINE
DISTINCTION.
THEY SEND COMMUNICATIONS BACK
AND FORTH TO AMERICANS, TO
PEOPLE IN THE UNITED STATES, AND
SO THE WHOLLY LAB RAT PROCEDURE
THAT WE HAD SET UP IS TO KEEP
THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE
AGENCIES ON THE SIDE OF
GATHERING INFORMATION AGAINST
FOREIGNERS AND ONLY GATHER
INFORMATION ABOUT AMERICANS
UNDER A COURT ORDER, THE
EQUIVALENT OF A WARRANT THAT WAS
TALKED ABOUT EARLIER.
IT'S THIS BACK-AND-FORTH, TRYING
TO PROTECT THE RIGHTS OF
AMERICANS WHILE YET MAKING
INFORMATION AVAILABLE TO THE
DOMESTIC LAW ENFORCEMENT
SERVICES THAT WILL HELP THEM TO
PROTECT AMERICANS THAT ALL OF
THESE SYSTEMS ARE SET UP.
>> Woodruff: BUT IT SOUNDS LIKE
IN SO DOING WHAT THE
INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES HAVE IS
ACCESS TO MILLIONS IF NOT
BILLIONS OF TELEPHONE/INTERNET
COMMUNICATIONS FROM PEOPLE WHO
ARE... WHO HAVE NOTHING TO DO
WITH TERRORISM.
>> NO, I THINK THAT'S A
MISCONCEPTION, JUDY.
THEY DON'T.
THEY HAVE ACCESS ONLY TO
INFORMATION WHICH THEY HAVE
CONVINCED A COURT, THE FOREIGN
INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE COURT,
THAT HAS PROBABLE VALUE.
IT'S A PROBLEBA CAUSE SORT OF
JUSTIFICATION.
AT THAT POINT, LET'S TAKE AN
EXAMPLE.
A FOREIGN TERRORIST SUSPECT
MAKES A PHONE CALL TO A NUMBER
IN THE UNITED STATES AND THE
NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY
TO PICK UP THE FOREIGN END OF
THAT CONVERSATION.
IN ORDER TO KNOW WHO THAT CALL
WAS MADE TO, WHEN IT WAS TAKING
PLACE, THE LOCATION, THE
NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY HAS TO
GO TO THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE
SURVEILLANCE COURT, GET
PERMISSION TO SEARCH THE
DATABASES OF... THAT ARE
COLLECTED BY THE COMMUNICATIONS
COMPANIES FOR THAT NUMBER, FIND
OUT THE NUMBER, FIND OUT WHO
OWNS THAT NUMBER.
IT IS AT THAT POINT TURNED OVER
TO THE F.B.I. FOR THEM TO
INVESTIGATE.
SO THE ONLY NUMBERS THAT THE
N.S. A.... THE ONLY NUMBERS THAT
THE N.S.A. ACTUALLY GAINS
INFORMATION ABOUT ARE THOSE
WHICH ARE LINKED TO SUSPICIOUS
ACTIVITY GATHERED OVERSEAS AND
UNDER COURT ORDER.
>> Woodruff: WE HEARD SENATOR
RAND PAUL SAY THAT THIS IS
UNCONSTITUTIONAL, WHAT'S GOING
ON.
HE SAID HE DOESN'T KNOW OF ANY
LAW THAT AUTHORIZES ALL THIS
DATA COLLECTION.
>> WELL, WITH DUE RESPECT TO THE
SENATOR, I THINK HE'S JUST FLAT
WRONG ON THAT.
THIS IS UNDER A LAW THAT WAS
PASSED BY THE CONGRESS IN ITS
CURRENT FORM ABOUT 2007-2008.
IT GOES THROUGH SEVERAL BRANCHES
OF GOVERNMENT IN ADDITION TO THE
INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES, THE
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE OVERSEES
IT.
THE REQUEST IS THEN MADE TO THE
FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE
SURVEILLANCE COURT.
THERE'S THEN FOLLOWAL UP AND
THERE ARE REPORTS TO CONGRESS
ROUTINELY ON THIS ACTIVITY.
SO I THINK IT'S VERY
CONSTITUTIONAL.
IT INVOLVES ALL BRANCHES OF THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
IT'S DESIGNED TO PROTECT
AMERICANS WHILE PROTECTING THEIR
CIVIL LIBERTIES.
I THINK IT'S AN EXTREMELY WELL
RUN AND CONSTITUTIONAL PROGRAM.
>> Woodruff: ADMIRAL BLAIR, WHAT
ABOUT ANOTHER CRITICISM WE HEARD
FROM SENATOR MARK UDALL WHO SAID
THAT HE HAS SEEN NOTHING THAT
PROVES THAT THIS SYSTEM WORKS.
THERE'S NOTHING PROVEN THAT IT
HAS ACTUALLY DISRUPTED A
TERRORIST PLOT.
>> AGAIN, WITH DUE RESPECT TO
THE SENATOR, THAT'S ALSO FLAT
WRONG.
THERE ARE SEVERAL PLOTS WHICH
WERE THWARTED BY THE USE OF
THIS... AND I'M GOING TO SAY
THIS TYPE OF PROGRAM.
I DON'T WANT TO DISCUSS
INDIVIDUAL PROGRAMS.
BUT THIS SYSTEM OF OVERSEAS
INTELLIGENCE LINKED TO AN
AMERICAN PHONE NUMBER BEING
TURNED OVER UNDER COURT ORDER TO
AMERICAN LAW ENFORCEMENT
COMPANIES HAVE THWARTED
MULTIPLE, MULTIPLE ATTACKS.
I'LL JUST LEAVE IT AT THAT.
>> Woodruff: LET ME COME BACK TO
A QUESTION I ASKED YOU EARLIER
BECAUSE I'M NOT SURE I
UNDERSTOOD YOUR ANSWER.
IF EDWARD SNOWDEN DOES NOT HAVE
ACCESS TO AS MUCH INFORMATION AS
IT APPEARS HE MAY, THEN WHAT IS
THE DAMAGE THAT'S BEEN DONE BY
THIS?
>> WELL, THE DAMAGE IN ALL OF
THIS IS THAT IN DISCUSSING THE
GENERAL CONCEPTS OF THE
PROGRAMS -- WHICH, AS I SAY, ARE
FULLY AUTHORIZED AND
SUPERVISED -- IF IT'S DONE IN AN
UNCOORDINATED AND IN A FREE
LANCE MANNER, INDIVIDUAL PIECES
OF HOW THE PROGRAMS ARE ACTUALLY
SET UP CAN BE RELEASED WHICH
THEN, OF COURSE, MAKE IT EASIER
FOR OUR ENEMIES TO EVADE THEM
AND TO MOUNT THEIR THREATS TO
AMERICANS IN DIFFERENT WAYS.
SO I'M ALL FOR TALKING ABOUT THE
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF THESE
PROGRAMS.
I'M ALL FOR EXAMPLES WHICH
ILLUSTRATE HOW THEY WORK.
BUT WHEN THOSE WHO HAVE BEEN
INSIDE THE PROGRAM TALK ABOUT
SPECIFIC PARTS OF THEM, IT POSES
A DANGER BECAUSE OUR ENEMIES USE
THEM TO LEARN AND THEN COME AT
US IN NEW WAYS AND IT COSTS US A
LOT MORE TIME, EFFORT, TROUBLE
AND THERE ARE PERIODS OF DANGER
UNTIL WE CAN GET BACK ON TOP OF
IT.
>> Woodruff: ADMIRAL DENNIS
BLAIR, THE FORMER DIRECTOR OF
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, WE THANK
YOU VERY MUCH FOR TALKING WITH
US.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME, JUDY.
>> Ifill: SO, IS EDWARD SNOWDEN
A HERO OR A TURNCOAT?
WE'LL DEBATE THAT LATER IN THE
BROADCAST.
ALSO STILL TO COME ON THE
"NEWSHOUR", WHY SOME FARMERS ARE
TRYING TO PRESERVE FORESTS IN
COSTA RICA.
THE U.S. PRESIDENT AND THE
CHINESE PRESIDENT MEET.
WHAT HAPPENS NEXT?
AND HOW SCIENTISTS ENGINEERED
CATS TO GLOW IN THE DARK.
BUT FIRST, WITH THE OTHER NEWS
OF THE DAY, HERE'S KWAME HOLMAN.
>> Holman: CAR BOMBERS HAVE
STRUCK AGAIN IN IRAQ, THIS TIME
KILLING AT LEAST 57 PEOPLE.
THE ATTACKS TODAY WERE THE
LATEST IN A NEW WAVE OF SHI'ITE-
SUNNI VIOLENCE.
THE FIRST TARGETS WERE MARKETS
NEAR THE CITY OF BAQOUBA IN A
SUBURB NORTH OF BAGHDAD AND IN
THE CITY OF TUZ KHORMATO.
LATER, BOMBS WENT OFF IN MOSUL,
AIMED AT POLICE STATIONS.
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION COULD
DECIDE THIS WEEK WHETHER IT'S
TIME TO SHIP ARMS TO REBELS IN
SYRIA.
TOP U.S. OFFICIALS BEGAN MEETING
TODAY TO CONSIDER THE QUESTION.
AND SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN
KERRY PUT OFF A TRIP TO THE
MIDDLE EAST TO TAKE PART IN THE
SESSIONS.
WHITE HOUSE SPOKESMAN JAY CARNEY
WOULD NOT SAY WHICH WAY THE
PRESIDENT IS LEANING.
>> THE PRESIDENT HAS MADE CLEAR,
I HAVE MADE CLEAR, THAT ALL
OPTIONS REMAIN ON THE TABLE IN
TERMS OF SYRIA AND... ALTHOUGH
HE HAS ALSO SAID THAT HE DOES
NOT FORESEE A CIRCUMSTANCE THAT
WOULD INVOLVE AMERICAN BOOTS ON
THE GROUND.
BUT OPTIONS... HE INSISTS THAT
ALL OPTIONS BE AVAILABLE TO HIM
AND HE IS CONSTANTLY REVIEWING
THEM.
>> Holman: THE U.S. IS UNDER
GROWING PRESSURE TO ACT, DESPITE
CONCERNS THAT WEAPONS WOULD END
UP IN THE HANDS OF EXTREMISTS.
THAT'S BECAUSE SYRIAN GOVERNMENT
TROOPS HAVE BEEN RETAKING KEY
AREAS, WITH THE HELP OF
HEZBOLLAH GUERRILLAS FROM
LEBANON.
LAST WEEK, THEY CAPTURED THE
TOWN OF QUSAIR, AND NOW THE CITY
OF HOMS APPEARS TO BE NEXT ON
THE TARGET LIST.
THE WORLD'S CARBON DIOXIDE
EMISSIONS HIT A RECORD HIGH LAST
YEAR.
THE INTERNATIONAL ENERGY AGENCY
REPORTED TODAY THAT RELEASE OF
THE GREENHOUSE GAS ROSE MORE
THAN ONE PERCENT.
EMISSIONS FROM THE U.S. AND
EUROPE ACTUALLY FELL, BUT THOSE
REDUCTIONS WERE CANCELED BY
CHINA'S GROWING CARBON DIOXIDE
FOOTPRIT.N
CHINESE EMISSIONS WERE UP MORE
THAN 3.5%.
IN SOUTH AFRICA, FORMER
PRESIDENT NELSON MANDELA WAS
HOSPITALIZED IN PRETORIA FOR A
THIRD DAY.
DOCTORS SAID HE'S IN "SERIOUS
BUT STABLE" CONDITION WITH A
RECURRING LUNG INFECTION.
MEMBERS OF HIS FAMILY COULD BE
SEEN ARRIVING AT THE HOSPITAL
WHERE HE'S BEING TREATED.
IT'S THE FOURTH TIME HE'S BEEN
HOSPITALIZED SINCE DECEMBER.
MANDELA IS 94 YEARS OLD.
JURY SELECTION BEGAN TODAY IN
SANFORD, FLORIDA, IN THE MURDER
TRIAL OF A NEIGHBORHOOD WATCH
VOLUNTEER, GEORGE ZIMMERMAN.
HE'S ACCUSED OF KILLING AN
UNARMED TEENAGER, TRAYVON
MARTIN, IN FEBRUARY 2012.
THE CASE HAS DRAWN NATIONAL
ATTENTION.
ZIMMERMAN SAYS HE ACTED IN SELF-
DEFENSE.
MARTIN'S FAMILY AND PROSECUTORS
CLAIM HE WAS A VICTIM OF RACIAL
PROFILING.
THE SENATE MOVED TODAY TO PASS A
NEW, FIVE-YEAR FARM BILL.
IT WOULD COST ALMOST $100
BILLION A YEAR AND MAKE SMALL
CUTS IN FOOD STAMPS, WHICH
ACCOUNT FOR 80% OF THE BILL'S
COST.
THE HOUSE COULD TAKE UP ITS
VERSION OF THE BILL LATER THIS
NTH.MO
REPUBLICAN LEADERS THERE ARE
PUSHING FOR MUCH LARGER CUTS IN
FOOD STAMPS.
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS NOMINATED
JASON FURMAN TO CHAIR HIS
"COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS".
FURMAN IS A LONGTIME
PRESIDENTIAL ADVISOR ON TAX
POLICY.
THE PRESIDENT SAID TODAY HE
NEVER FORGETS HE'S FIGHTING FOR
THE MIDDLE CLASS.
AND ON WALL STREET, THE DOW
JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE LOST
NINE POINTS.
THE NASDAQ ROSE FOUR POINTS TO
CLOSE AT XXXX.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO GWEN.
>> Ifill: WE RETURN NOW TO THE
STORY OF EDWARD SNOWDEN, THE 29-
YEAR-OLD FORMER C.I.A. EMPLOYEE
AND INTELLIGENCE CONTRACTOR
WHO'S ADMITTED LEAKING
GOVERNMENT SECRETS.
IS HE A CRIMINAL WHO PUT
AMERICANS AT RISK?
OR IS HE A HERO WHO TOLD
AMERICANS WHAT THEY NEED TO KNOW
ABOUT HOW CLOSELY THEIR
GOVERNMENT IS WATCHING THEM?
WE HAVE TWO POINTS OF VIEW ON
THAT FROM JANE HARMAN, A FORMER
NINE-TERM MEMBER OF CONGRESS WHO
WAS THE TOP DEMOCRAT ON THE
HOUSE INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEE.
SHE'S NOW PRESIDENT OF THE
WOODROW WILSON INTERNATIONAL
CENTER.
AND AUTHOR AND JOURNALIST JAMES
BAMFORD, WHO HAS WRITTEN
EXTENSIVELY ABOUT THE N.S.A. AND
OTHER INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES.
WELCOME TO YOU BOTH.
IS EDWARD SNOWDEN A LEAKER OR A
WHISTLE BLOWER?
>> DEFINITELY A WHISTLE BLOWER.
HE'S NOT PROFITING FROM THIS IN
ANYWAY.
HE'S GOING TO BE HARMED VERY
SEVERELY BECAUSE OF THIS.
HE'S DOING THIS BECAUSE HE
THINKS IT'S RIGHT BECAUSE HE
THINKS THAT THE PUBLIC SHOULD
KNOW THAT THE GOVERNMENT WAS
PICKING UP AND STORING BILLIONS
OF THEIR TELEPHONE RECORDS.
YOU KNOW, THEY HAD A DEBATE
ABOUT THIS IN ENGLAND IN THE
LAST FEW WEEKS.
IT WAS PUBLIC.
IT WAS ABOUT A BILL GOING
THROUGH CONGRESS TO DO A SIMILAR
THING.
OVER HERE WE DON'T DO THAT.
WE JUST SECRETLY DO ALL THESE
THINGS.
THE PUBLIC HAS A RIGHT TO KNOW
WHAT'S BEING DONE WITH THEIR
TELEPHONE RECORDS.
>> HE'S A LEAKER.
WHAT HE DID WAS INAPPROPRIATE.
I DO THINK WE SHOULD HAVE A
PUBLIC DEBATE.
WE ACTUALLY HAD A PUBLIC DEBATE
AROUND THE 2008 AMENDMENT, THE
FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE
SURVEILLANCE ACT.
THIS LAW HAS BEEN ON THE BOOKS
SINCE 1978.
IT WAS PASSED IN RESPONSE TO THE
ABUSES IN THE NIXON
ADMINISTRATION AND PURSUANT TO
THE CHURCH COMMISSION WHICH
INVESTIGATEDDED A LOT OF
INTELLIGENCE ABUSES IN THE MID
'70s.
IT WAS PASSED BY OVERWHELMING
BIPARTISAN MARGINS AND IT SET UP
THE SENATE INTELLIGENCE AND
HOUSE INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEES IN
ADDITION TO THE COURT TO REVIEW
INDIVIDUAL ACTIONS AGAINST U.S.
PERSONS.
IT CONTINUED THAT WAY THROUGH
2011 WHEN IT WAS CLEAR THE
AUTHORITIES WERE OUTDATED.
THEN WE AMENDED IT AFTER A
PUBLIC DEBATE IN THE UNITED
STATES CONGRESS.
IT WORKS WELL.
>> Ifill: SENATOR UDALL, WE JUST
HEARD, TALKS ABOUT THE SCALE OF
THIS PROGRAM.
IS IT POSSIBLE TO SHARE THIS
KIND OF INFORMATION AS EDWARD
SNOWDEN DID AND NOT SHARE IT AT
SUCH A SCALE.
IS THAT THE PROBLEM?
>> HAVE HIM SHARE THE
INFORMATION ABOUT WHAT HE PICKED
UP?
>> Ifill: SO MUCH OF IT.
WELL, WE'VE YET TO SEE WHAT
ELSE HE HAS OUT THERE.
RIGHT NOW HE RELEASED BASICALLY
TWO BIG PROGRAMS.
THE ONE ABOUT THE TELEPHONES AND
THE ONE ABOUT PRISON WHICH IS
INTERCEPTING THE INTERNET
TRAFFIC.
I DON'T THINK THAT WAS A BIG
RELEASE.
I MEAN, PEOPLE SHOULD KNOW THIS
IS GOING ON WITH THEIR
COMMUNICATION.
WHAT'S THE PIG SECRET?
THE TERRORISTS OBVIOUSLY HAVE
ASSUMED ALL ALONG WE'RE DOING TE
AMERICAN PUBLIC.
>> Ifill: HE'S MADE AVAILABLE TO
NEWSPAPERS POWER POINT SLIDES OF
WHICH THEY ONLY PUBLISHED FOUR
OF THEM BECAUSE THEY THOUGHT HE
WAS GIVING THEM THINGS THAT WERE
TOO SECRET.
>> I CAN'T MAKE ANY JUDGMENT
ABOUT THOSE.
WHAT I'M MAKING A JUDGMENT ON
WHAT WAS SEEN.
WHAT WE'VE SEEN IS THE
GOVERNMENT ACCESS WITHOUT ANY
KNOWLEDGE OF ANY PUBLIC ABOUT
ACCESS TO BILLIONS OF TELEPHONE
RECORDS EVERY DAY.
EVERY DAY SOMEBODY PICKS UP THE
TELEPHONE, MAKES A PHONE CALL, A
RECORD OF THAT PHONE CALL IS
BEING KEPT BY N.S.A.
PEOPLE SHOULD KNOW THAT.
THE SAME THING WITH THE
INTERNET.
>> Ifill: JANE HARMAN, LET ME
READ TO YOU SOMETHING.
"THERE IS NO DOUBT THAT IT HAS
TRANSFORMED ITSELF INTO THE
LARGEST, MOST COVERT AND
POTENTIALLY MOST INTREUSIVE
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY EVER
CREATED."
>> WELL, IT'S LARGE.
I AGREE WITH THAT, BUT THE
PROGRAMS WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
WERE DEVELOPED IN CONGRESS
PURSUANT TO DEBATE.
THEY ARE SUBJECT TO OVERSIGHT BY
CONGRESS.
THERE IS A FEDERAL COURT, THAT'S
WHAT THE F.I.S.A. COURT IS, A
ROTATING COURT THAT INCLUDES 11
FEDERAL JUDGES AT LEAST THREE OF
WHOM HAVE TO LIVE NEAR
WASHINGTON SO THEY CAN
PERSONALLY REVIEW ANY
INDIVIDUALIZED REQUESTS TO READ
CONTENT OR LISTEN TO... IN FACT,
THE PHONE RECORDS ARE RECORDS.
BUT TO LISTEN TO SOMEBODY, IT'S
PROSPECTIVE.
IT'S NOT RETROACTIVE.
NO ONE IS LISTENING TO OUR PHONE
CALLS RIGHT NOW UNLESS THERE'S
AN INDIVIDUALIZED RECORD.
BUT AT ANY RATE, CONGRESS PASSED
THESE LAWS AND.
MY EXPERIENCE, HAVING WORKED
THERE AND HAVING BEEN INVOLVED
IN THE 2008 AMENDMENTS TO FISA,
HAVING BEEN VERY DISTRESSED AT
THE EARLY BUSH ADMINISTRATION
WASN'T FOLLOWING FISA RIGHT
AFTER 9/11 BUT AT ANY RATE THESE
LAWS WORK WELL.
THE OVERSIGHT IS ROBUST BY THE
SENATORS AND HOUSE MEMBERS WHO
DO IT MOSTLY ON THE INTELLIGENCE
COMMITTEE.
>> Ifill: THERE ARE LAWS.
THERE ARE COURTS.
WHAT'S WRONG WITH THAT?
IF IT'S LEGAL OR IS THAT WHAT'S
WRONG WITH IT?
>> CONGRESS, PLEASE.
WHERE WERE THEY WHEN THE BUSH
ADMINISTRATION WAS DOING THEIR
WARRANTLESS EAVESDROPPING?
>> I'LL ANSWER THAT.
LET ME FINISH.
YOU KNOW, THE CONGRESS... IS
SENATE INTELLIGENCE COMEE STARTD
OUT AS AN ORGANIZATION TO
PROTECT THE PUBLIC FROM THE
INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES.
NOW IT'S SIMPLY BECOME A
CHEERING GALLERY FOR THE
INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES.
THEY WANT TO GIVE IT MORE MONEY.
THEY WANT TO GIVE IT MORE POWER.
AND YOU CAN SEE WHAT HAPPENS
DURING THE BUSH ADMINISTRATION.
>> I SERVED THERE FOR EIGHT
YEARS.
I DON'T THINK I WAS A CHEERING
GALLERY FOR THE BUSH PRACTICES.
FIRST OF ALL, I OBJECTED ONCE I
UNDERSTOOD IT, THAT THE BUSH
TERRORIST SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM,
T.S.P. WAS BEING CONDUCTEDDED
OUTSIDE OF FISA.
THAT WAS NOT INFORMATION I HAD.
I WAS IN THE GANG OF EIGHT, LET
INTO THIS VERY, VERY SECRET
PROGRAM.
I WAS TOLD EVERY TIME IT
STRICTLY COMPLIED WITH LAW.
WHAT I WASN'T TOLD WAS THESE
WERE BUSH LAWS MADE IN THE
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT.
WHEN THAT WAS CLEAR I AND MANY
OTHERS IN CONGRESS SPENT A LOT
OF TIME MAKING SURE THAT THIS
PROGRAM, WHICH WAS KNOWN TO THE
PUBLIC -- I MEAN FIRST OF ALL IT
WAS LEAKED TO THE "NEW YORK
TIMES."
EVERYBODY WAS AWARE ABOUT THE
PHONE RECORDS COLLECTION PROGRAM
AND WHAT IT WAS FOR.
-- WAS STRICTLY COVERED BY FISA.
>> Ifill: LET ME ASK YOU BOTH A
QUESTION.
THERE HAVE BEEN AT LEAST TWO
POLLS OUT TODAY SHOWING MOST
AMERICANS THINK IT'S FINE.
THEY DON'T HAVE A PROBLEM WITH
THIS.
LET ME ASK YOU THIS QUESTION.
WHAT HAS THE GATHERING OF THIS
INFORMATION, THIS EFFORT THAT
THE N.S.A. HAS SPENT TO GATHER
PERSONAL INFORMATION, WHAT HAS
THAT HURT?
>> WHAT IT HURTS IS A DEMOCRACY.
A DEMOCRACY IS NOT SUPPOSED TO
DO THINGS LIKE THAT.
YOU'RE SUPPOSED TO HAVE OPEN
SOCIETIES WHERE GOVERNMENTS, IF
THEY WANT TO DO THAT, DO WHAT
THE BRITISH DID.
BRING A BILL THROUGH CONGRESS
AND SAY WE WANT TO DO THIS.
WE WANT TO HAVE ALL YOUR RECORDS
EVERY SINGLE DAY SENT TO THE
N.S.A.
SEE HOW MUCH OF A VOTE YOU'LL
GET ON THAT.
THEY TRIED THAT IN BRITAIN AND
THEY VOTED IT DOWN.
>> AGAIN IT'S TELEPHONE NUMBERS
NOT ATTACHD TO PEOPLE.
AND THE ONLY ACCESS YOU CAN GET
TO THIS META-DATA, IF A U.S.
CITIZEN OR A U.S. LEGAL RESIDENT
IS INVOLVED IS ON AN INDIVIDUAL
BASIS ONCE YOU GO THROUGH THE
FEDERAL COURT TO GET AN
INDIVIDUALIZED WARRANT WHICH IS
WHAT THE FOURTH AMENDMENT
REQUIRES.
>> Ifill: WHEN YOU WERE IN
CONGRESS, HOW OFTEN WERE YOU
BRIEFED ON PROGRAMS LIKE THIS?
>> WELL,...
Ifill: THEY'RE NOT SECRET
ANYMORE.
>> BUT I WAS BRIEFED REGULARLY
ON PROGRAMS.
DID I WANT MORE INFORMATION?
YES, I WANTED THE MEMOS THAT THE
OFFICE OF LEGAL COUNSEL, THE
O.L.C., AND THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT WAS PROVIDING.
WE COULDN'T GET THOSE.
YEAH, I WANTED MORE ROBUST
BRIEFINGS AND I THINK CONGRESS
SHOULD PUSH FOR THAT.
I'M NOT SAY THIS IS PERFECT.
I THINK THERE OUGHT TO BE A
ROBUST PUBLIC DEBATE.
I THINK WE NEED A COMPREHENSIVE,
A NEW COMPREHENSIVE SET OF LEGAL
BOUNDARIES AROUND OUR POST 9/11
POLICY.
WE'RE IN THE SECOND DECADE.
>> Ifill: THAT'S WHERE I WANT TO
END THIS.
THERE HAS TO BE A LINE SOMEWHERE
BETWEEN PRIVACY AND SECURITY.
YOU AGREE ON THAT.
WHERE IS THE LINE?
>> WELL, THE LINE YOU KNOW, THE
LINE, I WOULD PUT IT, IF YOU'RE
GOING TO INVADE AMERICAN
PRIVACY, YOU BRING A BILL
THROUGH CONGRESS AND YOU DO IT
PUBLICLY THAT WAY.
YOU DON'T DO IT SECRETLY LIKE
THEY USED TO DO IN EAST GERMANY
DURING THE COLD WAR.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT HAVING A
DEBATE NOW.
HOW WOULD WE HAVE HAD THIS
DEBATE, HOW WOULD WE BE SITTING
HERE TALKING ABOUT THIS IF IT
WASN'T FOR EDWARD SNOWDEN?
>> WELL, I THINK... I APPLAUD
WHAT MARK UDALL HAS DONE AND RON
WIDEN.
THEY MADE CLEAR THEY DISAGREED
WITH SOME SOME ASPECTS OF THIS.
THEY PURSUED THEIR DISAGREEMENT
INSIDE THE SYSTEM.
AND I THINK ULTIMATELY THEY
WOULD HAVE CAUSED THE DEBATE
THAT WE SHOULD BE HAVING.
I'M SORRY.
I THINK AMERICANS WANT OUR
COUNTRY PROTECTED.
I DON'T THINK IT'S A CHOICE
BETWEEN SECURITY AND LIBERTY.
I DON'T THINK IT'S A ZERO SUM
GAIN.
IT'S A POSITIVE SUM GAIN.
YOU GET MORE OF BOTH OR LESS OF
BOTH.
WE CREATED A PRIVATE CIVIL LIB
LIBERTIES COMMISSION WHEN WE
REORGANIZED THE INTELLIGENCE
COMMUNITY IN 2004.
YOU'RE ROLLING YOUR EYES.
THE SENATE FINALLY CONFIRMED THE
PERSON.
THAT COMMISSION...
>> Ifill: WE'RE NOT GOING TO
RESOLVE THIS TONIGHT
UNFORTUNATELY.
JANE HARMAN, JAMES SANFORD,
THANK YOU BOTH VERY MUCH.
WE'LL TALK ABOUT IT SOME MORE.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Woodruff: NOW, WE KICK OFF A
WEEK-LONG SERIES ON FOOD AND HOW
CLIMATE CHANGE IS IMPACTING WHAT
WE PRODUCE AND HOW WE EAT.
TONIGHT, SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
SAM EATON REPORTS ON NEW EFFORTS
TO PRESERVE FORESTS WHILE
KEEPING UP THE DEMAND FOR
FARMING IN COSTA RICA.
IT'S PART OF OUR SERIES "FOOD
FOR NINE BILLION" IN PARTNERSHIP
WITH P.R.I.'S THE WORLD,
HOMELAND PRODUCTIONS, AMERICAN
PUBLIC MEDIA'S "MARKETPLACE" AND
THE CENTER FOR INVESTIGATIVE
REPORTING.
>> Eaton: THIS IS A TYPICAL FARM
IN COSTA RICA-- ABOUT TEN ACRES
OF COFFEE MIXED WITH MORE THAN A
DOZEN FOOD CROPS LIKE CORN,
BEANS AND BANANAS.
BUT WHEN 65-YEAR-OLD FARMER
ADEMAR SERRANO ABARCA PURCHASED
THIS LAND A DECADE AGO, IT WAS
WITH THE IDEA OF DOING THINGS
DIFFERENTLY.
INSTEAD OF CLEARING ALL THE
TREES-- A COMMON PRACTICE IN
TROPICAL AGRICULTURE-- HE SET
ASIDE MORE THAN A QUARTER OF IT,
LETTING THE FOREST REGENERATE.
>> (translated): NOT ALL OF US
SHARE THESE SAME IDEAS.
OTHER FARMERS DON'T HAVE THIS,
THEY'VE LOST IT.
BUT FOR ME, IT'S A GAIN.
EVERYTHING YOU SEE HERE IS A
GAIN FOR ME.
>> Eaton: WORLDWIDE, AGRICULTURE
REPRESENTS A HUGE THREAT TO THE
PLANETS REMAINING NATURAL AREAS.
COSTA RICA IS TRYING TO PRESERVE
WHAT NATURE IT HAS LEFT.
IT'S IS ONE OF THE FIRST
COUNTRIES TO COMPENSATE FARMERS
LIKE ABARCA FOR LEAVING PART OF
THEIR LAND OUT OF PRODUCTION.
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE,
GLORIA ABRAHAM PERALTA, SAYS
POLICIES LIKE THIS HAVE ALLOWED
COSTA RICA TO GO FROM HAVING ONE
OF THE FASTEST RATES OF
DEFORESTATION ON THE PLANET TO
TODAY BOASTING AROUND 50% FOREST
COVER.
>> (translated): IT'S A
COMMITMENT TO THE FUTURE NOT BY
THE BIG COMPANIES OR THE BIG
FARMS, BUT BY THE SMALL FARMERS
WHO KNOW THAT THEIR FUTURE
DEPENDS ON HOW THEY CARE FOR
THEIR FARM AND THEIR ABILITY TO
ADAPT.
THE FUTURE GENERATIONS FOOD
SUPPLY ALSO DEPENDS ON THAT!
I THINK THAT WE AS A COUNTRY CAN
BE A GOOD PUBLIC EXAMPLE AT AN
INTERNATIONAL LEVEL OF WHAT CAN
BE DONE.
>> Eaton: THOSE FEDERAL
INCENTIVES SWEETEN THE POT FOR
SMALL FARMERS LIKE ABARCA.
BUT THE BENEFITS OF FOSTERING
BIODIVERSITY ON THE FARM DON'T
STOP THERE.
SCIENTISTS AT THE NEARBY LAS
CRUCES BIOLOGICAL STATION HAVE
BEEN RESEARCHING HOW FARMERS
LIKE ABARCA ARE GAINING FROM THE
SERVICES NATURE PROVIDES.
GRETCHEN DAILY DIRECTS STANFORD
UNIVERSITY'S CENTER FOR
CONSERVATION BIOLOGY.
>> SO THE LAND IS PRODUCING
ABOUT 15 FOOD TYPES FOR PEOPLE
HERE.
THEN ON TOP OF THAT THERE'S
BIRDS PROVIDING PEST CONTROL
SERVICES.
THE VAST MAJORITY OF PESTS ON
CROPS ARE CONTROLLED NATURALLY
BY BIRDS, BY WASPS, BY BATS, AND
OTHER THINGS.
>> Eaton: IN THE PAST, FARMS
WERE GENERALLY CONSIDERED TO BE
ECOLOGICAL DESERTS, COMPLETELY
BARREN OF THE RICH BIODIVERSITY
THAT EXISTS ON NATURE PRESERVES.
BUT AS SCIENTISTS STUDY MORE AND
MORE SMALL FARMS LIKE THIS ONE,
WITH ITS MIX OF TREES AND COFFEE
AND FOOD CROPS, THEY'RE FINDING
AN INCREDIBLE AMOUNT OF
BIODIVERSITY CAN COEXIST WITH
FOOD PRODUCTION.
IT'S EARLY MORNING, AND DAILY'S
TEAM IS STRINGING OUT MIST NETS
IN ABARCA'S COFFEE FIELDS.
SO FAR THEY'VE CAPTURED MORE
THAN A HUNDRED DIFFERENT SPECIES
OF BIRDS ON THESE FARMS AND
FOREST FRAGMENTS.
IT'S PART OF A PROJECT TO
QUANTIFY THEIR VALUE IN DOLLARS.
EACH BIRD, LIKE THIS RUFOUS-
CAPPED WARBLER, PLAYS A SPECIFIC
ROLE.
AND THAT ROLE CORRESPONDS TO AN
ECONOMIC BENEFIT TO THE FARMER.
>> SOME OF THESE BIRDS, WE HAVE
RECORDS GOING BACK AUT 1BO4
YEARS.
>> SO WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO FIND
OUT IS HOW MANY INSECTS THESE
BIRDS EAT.
IF YOU HAVE THIS LITTLE BIT OF
TREE COVER HERE, HOW MANY
WARBLERS WILL YOU HAVE AND HOW
MUCH OF A BOOST WILL THESE
WARBLERS GIVE TO THE COFFEE
FARMERS?
THIS ONE EATS THE BIGGEST AND
MOST WORRYING PEST ON COFFEE, WE
FOUND IN ITS DROPPINGS A LOT OF
THOSE LITTLE BUGS THAT CAUSE THE
MOST DAMAGE.
SO IT ADDS A HUGE BOOST TO THE
INCOME OF FARMERS.
>> Eaton: DAILY AND HER TEAM
HAVE BEEN TRACKING THE INCOME
POTENTIAL OF EVERY INSECT EATER
AND POLLINATOR ON THESE FARMS.
IT'S A 24-HOUR JOB.
THESE BATS RUN THE NIGHT SHIFT,
CONSUMING PESTS, CARRYING POLLEN
AND SCATTERING SEEDS UNTIL DAWN.
>> EACH NIGHT THEY CAN CONSUME
ABOUT THEIR BODY WEIGHT WORTH OF
INSECT FLESH, MOSQUITOES AND
OTHER KINDS OF PESTS THAT THE
FARMERS DON'T WANT.
>> Eaton: BUT IT'S NATURE'S
SMALLEST POLLINATORS WHO HAVE SO
FAR BROUGHT THE BIGGEST GAINS.
IN A STUDY DAILY RAN ON NEARBY
COFFEE FARMS, SHE DOCUMENTED HOW
FORESTS NEXT TO THE FARMS AND
THE HUNDREDS OF SPECIES OF
NATIVE BEES THAT INHABIT THEM
ARE A BOON TO COFFEE PRODUCTION,
WITH THE BEES LEAVING THE FOREST
AND SPREADING POLLEN FROM PLANT
TO PLANT FOR THAT ONE WEEK OF
THE YEAR THAT THE COFFEE PLANTS
BLOOM.
>> SO YOU NEED TO HAVE FOREST
INTEGRATED INTO THE COFFEE FARM
RIGHT NEXT TO WHERE THE FARMERS
ARE WORKING AND THE BEES THEN
FLY OUT AND THEY'RE WORKERS JUST
LIKE THE PEOPLE ARE.
ON THE ONE FARM WHERE WE WORKED
WE MEASURED THE VALUE OF THAT
AND IT BOOSTS YIELD BY ABOUT 20%
AND THAT LEAD TO AN INCOME BOOST
OF ABOUT $60,000 PER YEAR, WHICH
REALLY PUT THOSE FARMERS INTO A
GOOD ECONOMIC POSITION.
>> Eaton: AND IT'S NOT JUST
SMALL FARMS THAT STAND TO GAIN
FROM BIODIVERSITY.
COSTA RICA IS THE LARGEST
PINEAPPLE PRODUCER IN THE WORLD,
BUT A VAST MONOCROP LIKE THIS IS
EXTREMELY VULNERABLE TO COSTLY
PEST INFESTATIONS, WHICH ARE
BECOMING MORE SEVERE WITH
CLIMATE CHANGE.
MOST FARMS USE HUGE AMOUNTS OF
PESTICIDES TO CONTROL THE
OUTBREAKS.
BUT THIS FARM IS USING TREES
INSTEAD, OFFERING A WINDOW INTO
HOW EVEN LARGE SCALE, INDUSTRIAL
AGRICULTURE CAN BENEFIT FROM
WORKING WITH NATURE RATHER THAN
AGAINST IT.
JENNIFER MONGE MANAGES THE B
JIMENEZ FARM IN NORTHERN COSTA
RICA.
SHE SAYS KEEPING HALF THE LAND
IN FOREST PROVIDES A NATURAL
PEST BARRIER AS WELL AS CREATING
A COOLER MICROCLIMATE, WHICH
PROTECTS THE PINEAPPLES FROM
DAMAGING HEAT WAVES AND DROUGHT.
>> (translated): SO WE'VE BEEN
ABLE TO INCREASE OUR YIELD
WITHOUT TOUCHING THE FOREST.
WE'VE INCREASED OUR EFFICIENCY
IN MANAGING PESTS, WE'VE
INCREASED OUR OVERALL
PRODUCTIVITY WITHOUT INCREASING
OUR WORKFORCE.
>> Eaton: YIELDS ON THIS
PINEAPPLE FARM ARE HIGHER THAN
AVERAGE AND THE FARM IS
PROFITABLE.
GRETCHEN DAILY SAYS EXAMPLES
LIKE THESE ARE PROOF THAT THE
MODEL IS SCALEABLE.
>> THE IDEA IN THE PAST IS THAT
TO HAVE A REALLY HIGH YIELD, YOT
PLANT A MONOCULTURE OF PINEAPPLE
OR SUGARCANE OR COFFEE OR
WHATEVER IT IS.
BUT WHAT WERE FINDING TODAY IS
THAT ACTUALLY YOU CAN SUSTAIN
REALLY HIGH YIELD AND PRETTY
HIGH BIODIVERSITY IN THESE NEW,
REALLY SMART PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
THAT ARE ECONOMICALLY ATTRACTIVE
AS WELL.
>> Eaton: WITH TWO THIRDS OF OUR
CROPS WORLDWIDE DEPENDING ON
SOME FORM OF POLLINATION, DAILY
SAYS MORE AND MORE FARMS, LARGE
AND SMALL, WILL NEED TO
INTEGRATE NATURE.
AND IF THEY DON'T, THE DRIVE TO
PRODUCE MORE FOOD COULD WIPE OUT
OUR GREATEST ASSET FOR ADAPTING
TO THE CHALLENGES OF THE FUTURE.
>> AND SO THE MAGIC IN THE
FUTURE TO GET US OUT OF THE
CRISIS WE FACE NOW WITH ALL OF
THESE INTENSE PRESSURES ON LAND,
WITH US CATAPULTING TO NINE
BILLION PEOPLE ON THE PLANET,
DIETS SHIFTING MORE TOWARDS
MEAT, CLIMATE CHANGE UNFOLDING
IN WAYS THAT WE CAN'T REALLY
PREDICT AND OTHER THINGS, THE
MAGIC IS GOING TO COME IN
FIGURING OUT HOW TO VALUE NATURE
IN OUR DECISIONS, HOW TO SEE
NATURE AS AN ASSET, A NATURAL
ASSET THAT CAN BE THE ENGINE OF
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT IN THE COMING
CENTURY.
>> Eaton: PERHAPS A GOOD PLACE
TO START, SHE SAYS, IBY SS EEING
NATURE NOT AS SOMETHING SEPARATE
FROM US, TO BE PRESERVED AND
PROTECTED, BUT AS AN INTEGRAL
PART OF OUR DAILY LIVES, AND,
ULTIMATELY, OF OUR SURVIVAL AS A
SPECIES.
>> Woodruff: YOU CAN FIND LINKS
TO OUR PARTNERS STORIES IN THE
"FOOD FOR NINE BILLION" SERIES
ON OUR WEBSITE.
AND TOMORROW, WE'LL LOOK AT THE
STRUGGLE FOR WATER IN BOOMING
QATAR.
>> Ifill: NOW TO THE U.S.
RELATIONSHIP WITH CHINA AND A
LOOK AT WHAT WAS AND WASN'T
ACCOMPLISHED AT THE WEEKEND
SUMMIT BETWEEN PRESIDENT OBAMA
AND CHINESE PRESIDENT XI
JINGPING.
JEFFREY BROWN REPORTS.
Brown: OUTWARDLY AT LEAST
THERE WAS AN AIR OF CALIFORN
CASUAL AT THE TWO-DAY SUMMIT IN
PALM SPRINGS BETWEEN PRESIDENTS
OBAMA AND XI.
AT ONE POINT ON SATURDAY, THE
TWO MEN TOOK A NEARLY HOUR-LONG
WALK DITCHING JACKETS, TIES AND
ADVISORS.
STILL THERE WERE NO
BREAKTHROUGHS ON THE ISSUE
TOPPING THE AGENDA: U.S.
ACCUSATIONS OF WIDE-RANGING
CYBER ATTACKS BY CHINA.
LAST MONTH A CONFIDENTIAL
PENTAGON REPORT CHARGED CHINESE
HACKERS HAD STOLEN DESIGN DATA
ON MORE THAN TWO DOZEN AMERICAN
WEAPONS SYSTEMS INCLUDING AN
ADVANCED PATRIOT MISSILE SYSTEM
AND THE F35 JOINT STRIKE
FIGHTER.
AIDES SAY PRESIDENT OBAMA
CONFRONTED XI WITH SPECIFIC
EVIDENCE.
IN PUBLIC THOUGH, THE LANGUAGE
WAS MEASURED.
>> WE'RE GOING TO HAVE TO WORK
VERY HARD TO BUILD A SYSTEM OF
DEFENSES AND PROTECTIONS BOTH IN
THE PRIVATE SECTOR AND IN THE
PUBLIC SECTOR EVEN AS WE
NEGOTIATE WITH OTHER COUNTRIES
AROUND SETTING UP A COMMON RULES
OF THE ROAD.
>> WE NEEDO T PAY CLOSE
ATTENTION TO THIS ISSUE AND FIND
WAYS TO RESOLVE THIS ISSUE.
THIS MATTER CAN BE AN AREA FOR
CHINA AND UNITED STATES TO WORK
TOGETHER WITH EACH OTHER IN A
PRAGMATIC WAY.
>> Brown: ON OTHER ISSUES THE
TWO PRESIDENTS DID AGREE TO WORK
ON REDUCING PRODUCTION OF
POWERFUL GREENHOUSE GASES CALLED
HYDRO FLOROCARBON.
THEY JOINED IN SPEAKING AGAINST
A NUCLEAR-ARMED NORTH KOREA.
CHINA HAS CRITICIZED PONG I
DON'T THINK FOR RECENT THREATS
SOUTH KOREA AND THE U.S. AND ON
SUNDAY JUST A DAY AFTER THE
OBAMA-XI SUMMIT NORTH KOREA HELD
ITS FIRST OFFICIAL TALKS WITH
SOUTH KOREA IN TWO YEARS.
A HIGHER-LEVEL ROUND OF TALKS IS
SET FOR WEDNESDAY.
>> Brown: MORE NOW, FROM DOUGLAS
PAAL OF THE CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT
FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE.
HE'S A FORMER NATIONAL SECURITY
COUNCIL STAFFER AND STATE
DEPARTMENT OFFICIAL.
AND RETIRED ARMY COL. LARRY
WORTZEL IS A COMMISSIONER ON THE
CONGRESSIONALLY CHARTERED U.S.-
CHINA ECONOMIC AND SECURITY
REVIEW COMMISSION.
HE'S ALSO A FORMER MILITARY
ATTACHE TO CHINA.
LARRY, LET ME START WITH YOU.
FIRST, JUST LOOKING AT THE
MEETING ITSELF, THE OPTICS OF
THE TWO LEADERS WALKING TOGETHER
CASUALLY, HOW IMPORTANT IS THAT
IN THE BROADER SCHEME OF THINGS?
>> WELL, I THINK THAT'S
IMPORTANT BECAUSE IT HELPS SET
THE PHONE FOR HOW THEY'LL RELATE
TO EACH OTHER AND PERHAPS HOW
THE SENIOR GOVERNMENT STAFFS OF
THE TWO COUNTRIES WILL RELATE TO
EACH OTHER.
BUT BEYOND THAT, NOT A LOT WAS
ACCOMPLISHED HERE.
>> WELL, DOUG PAAL, LET ME BRING
YOU IN.
IS IT MORE AT THIS POINT ABOUT
FLESHING OUT THE LARGER
RELATIONSHIP OR ABOUT
ACCOMPLISHING SPECIFIC THINGS
ALONG THE WAY.
>> VERVERY, VERY MUCH ABOUT THE
LARGER RELATIONSHIP.
THE UNITED STATES AND CHINA,
LIKE RISING POWER AND THE
ESTABLISHED POWERS OF HISTORY,
ARE COMING INTO GREATER
CONFLICT.
MUCH MORE FRICTION BETWEEN THE
TWO OF THEM AS CHINA POWER GROWS
AND EXTENDS INTO AMERICA'S
TRADITIONAL SPHERES OF
INFLUENCE.
HOW TO MANAGE THAT TO KEEP IT
FROM BECOMING OUT OF CONTROL IS
IS A BIG CHALLENGE.
MR. XI IS COMING IN FOR A
TEN-YEAR TENURE OF OFFICE BY ALL
EXPECTATIONS.
GETTING HIM EARLY TO THINK ABOUT
THESE BIG ISSUES AND TO PUT
BEFORE HIM THOSE BIG ISSUES, OUR
AMBITIONS AND OUR FEARS IN A
KIND OF QUIET SETTING IS A WAY
TO SORT OF SHAPE CHINA'S
RESPONSES TO THIS DEVELOPING
SITUATION.
>> Brown: WHEN YOU SAY BIG
ISSUES, YOU MEAN THE BIG ISSUE
OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE
TWO AS OPPOSED TO, SAY, CYBER
SPYING.
>> THAT IS PART OF IT AND AN
IMPORTANT PART OF IT.
OUR NAVY IS FLOATING BY THEIR
NAVIES.
WE HAVE INTELLIGENCE AIRCRAFTS
AND SHIPS NEAR THE CHINESE
KEEFT.
WE HAVE IMPORTANT TERRITORIAL
DISPUTES BETWEEN CHINA AND ITS
NEIGHBORS AND WE HAVE THE BIG
ISSUE OF NORTH KOREA NUCLEAR
PROCEED LIVE LAYINGS.
>> Brown: LARRY WORTZEL, COME IN
ON THAT.
ARE YOU SUGGESTING WE SHOULD BE
PUSHING MORE ON SOMETHING LIKE
CYBER SPYING AND NOT WORRY SO
MUCH ABOUT HOW THAT IMPACTS THE
LARGER RELATIONSHIP?
>> WELL, I THINK HOW WE PUSH AN
ISSUE IS IMPORTANT.
BUT QUITE FRANKLY, XI LAID DOWN
A NUMBER OF VERY STRONG MARKERS
THAT HIGHLIGHTED WHERE WE
DISAGREE ON SOVEREIGNTY ON
CERTAIN ISLANDS, ON U.S. ARMS
SALES TO TAIWAN AND ISSUES
RELATING TO CHINA'S SOVEREIGNTY
AND HIS FOREIGN MINISTER MADE IT
VERY CLEAR THAT ALTHOUGH CHINA
MAY AGREE THAT IN THE LONG TERM
THE KOREAN PENINSULA SHOULD BE
DENUCLEARIZED, WE TAKE VERY
DIFFERENT APPROACHES TO IT.
SO I THINK IN THE END WHAT THIS
DID FOR XI IS TO STRENGTHEN HIS
OWN MESSAGE AT HOME OF A STRONG
CHINA, STRENGTHEN HIS COMMUNIST
PARTY LINE ABOUT CHINA'S DREAM
AND TO STRENGTHEN THE IDEA THAT
CHINA IS IS NOW A GREAT POWER
STATE WHICH WAS PART OF HIS
PRESS RELEASE.
>> Brown: I'M WONDERING ABOUT
THAT, DOUG PAAL.
IS A MEETING LIKE THIS, PICKING
UP ON THAT, MORE IMPORTANT FOR
THE CHINESE THAN IT IS FOR US?
>> I DOUBT IT'S MORE IMPORTANT
TORE THEM THAN FOR US.
I THINK IT WILL BE EQUALLY
IMPORTANT IN THE LONG RUN.
THIS IS AN ERA OF GREAT
INTERCONNECTED ISSUES.
WE HAVE A NUCLEAR WEAPONS
OVERHANGING US.
IF WE CAN'T WORK OUR WAY THROUGH
SOME OF THESE PROBLEMS, NO
MATTER HOW NATIONALISTIC EACH OF
OUR LEADERS HAS TO BE FOR HIS
RESPECTIVE DOMESTIC AUDIENCE WE
COULD HAVE A DISASTROUS 21st
CENTURY.
IT'S REALLY IMPORTANT TO THROW
THE HAIL MARY PASS AND TRY TO
MAKE SOMETHING WORK.
WE WON'T KNOW THE RESULTS OF
THIS FOR A WHILE.
WE'VE HAD SMALL DISCUSSIONS ON
CYBER SECURITY AND ON H.F.C.s
WHICH IN SOME WAYS WERE
POSITIVE.
BUT THE REAL TEST OF THIS WILL
BE A FEW YEARS FROM NOW.
>> WHAT ABOUT ON THE NORTH KOREA
ISSUE.
DID YOU SEE MUCH MOVEMENT?
>> THERE'S BEEN IMPORTANT
MOVEMENT BY THE CHINESE ON THE
NORTH KOREAN ISSUE.
WHETHER IT AMOUNTS TO ANYTHING
TRULY SUBSTANTIAL WILL TAKE SOME
TIME.
CHINA USED TO ALWAYS SAY OUR
FIRST INTEREST IS CIVILITY ON
THE PENINSULA.
OUR SECOND IS DENUCLEARIZATION.
THEY'VE NOW SHIFTED THOSE
PRIORITIES PUTTING
DENUCLEARIZATION FIRST WHICH
MEANS IMPLICITLY THAT THEY WERE
WILL TO GO TAKE SOME RISK OF
STABILITY TO RESTRAIN NORTH
KOREA'S NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT.
>> LARRY WORTZEL, IS THERE...
GOING BACK TO THE LARGER ISSUE
HERE.
IS THERE A POTENTIAL FOR A FEAR
OF COMING TO A KIND OF COLD-WAR
RELATIONSHIP?
OR IS THAT WHAT THIS IS ABOUT,
TRYING TO AVOID THAT?
>> WELL, I MEAN, WE'RE CERTAINLY
IN A NUMR BEOF AREAS IN A
COMPETITION AND TO A CERTAIN
EXTENT CONFRONTATIONAL
RELATIONSHIP.
I THINK IT'S USEFUL IF BOTH
LEADERS CAN BACK AWAY FROM THAT.
WE ARE NOT GOING TO AGREE ON A
LOT OF THINGS.
AND I THINK ON THE CHINESE SIDE,
THEY'RE PROBABLY A LITTLE BIT
CONCERNED THAT THE TONE OF WHAT
CAME OUT OF THIS GETS DELIVERED
ONCE THE NATIONAL SECURITY ADD
VIER CHANGES.
THEY'RE PROBABLY A LITTLE
CONCERNED ABOUT WHAT HAPPENS
WHEN WE GET A NEW U.N.
AMBASSADOR WHO HAS FOCUSED ON
HUMAN RIGHTS.
>> Brown: EXPLAIN THAT FOR US A
LITTLE BIT BECAUSE THERE'S A NEW
TEAM COMING IN.
>> THERE'S A NEW TEAM COMING IN.
NOW, IN CHINA, YOU KNOW, YOU GO
TO... YOU CAN GO OUT TO THE FAR
WEST.
IF YOU DON'T FOLLOW WHAT THE
PARTY LINE SAYS.
BUT IN THE UNITED STATES IT'S
NOT UNUSUAL TO HAVE NATIONAL
SECURITY ADVISORS BEING STRONGER
OR WEAKER OR RUNNING OFF ON WHAT
THEY THINK OUGHT TO BE DONE
DESPITE THE PRESIDENT'S
GUIDANCE.
BUT I AM PLEASED TO SEE THAT
PRESIDENT OBAMA REINFORCED THE
IMPORTANCE OF THE REBALANCING TO
THE PACIFIC IN HIS REMARKS ABOUT
THIS SUMMIT.
>> DOUG PAAL, JUST VERY QUICKLY
BEFORE WE GO, I DO WANT TO ASK
YOU ABOUT EDWARD SNOWDEN WHO WE
HEARD DISCUSSED IN OUR EARLIER
SEGMENT THOUGHT TO BE IN HONG
KONG SEEKING ASYLUM THERE.
WHAT ARE THE CHANCES OF THAT,
THE RELATIONSHIP WITH HONG KONG
AND CHINA?
>> I SUSPECT HE'S GETTING OUT OF
HONG KONG BECAUSE HE DIDN'T
REALIZE UNTIL VERY RECENTLY THAT
HONG KONG HAS A STRONG
EXTRADITION ARRANGEMENT WITH THE
UNITED STATES.
I DON'T UNDERSTAND HOW THE
CHINESE WOULD WANT TO KEEP
SNOWDEN THERE.
THIS WOULD BE A HUGE ISSUE
BETWEEN US IF THEY WERE TO
INTERFERE WITH THE EXTRADITION
PROCESS.
THEY DO HAVE THAT RIGHT BUT I
THINK THEY WILL NOT EXERCISE IT.
>> Brown: DOUG PAAL, LARRY
WORTZEL, THANK YOU BOTH VERY
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT, A
GLIMPSE INSIDE THE WILD WORLD OF
ANIMAL BIOTECHNOLOGY.
RAY SUAREZ HAS THAT BOOK
CONVERSATION.
>> Suarez: GLOW IN THE DARK
CATS, GOATS THAT PRODUCE HUMAN
PHARMACEUTICALS IN THEIR MILK,
MUTANT MICE ENGINEERED TO HAVE
CANCER OR ALZHEIMERS DISEASE.
THEY MAY SOUND LIKE SCIENCE
FICTION BUT THESE ANIMALS ALL
EXIST TODAY.
SIGN TIFFS AND RESEARCHERS CAN
CREATE ANIMALS GENETICALLY
TAILORED TO DESIRED
SPECIFICATIONS NATURE NEVER
INTENDED.
IS IT DESIRABLE JUST BECAUSE
IT'S POSSIBLE?
ARE THERE ETHICAL BOUNDARIES
THAT MUST BE WATCHED?
EMILY ANTHES IS AUTHOR OF
FRANKENSTEIN'S CAT, CUDDLING UP
TO BIOTECH'S BRAVE NEW BEAST.
SHE JOINED ME NOW.
YOUR BOOK IS CHOCK FULL OF MORAL
MINE FIELDS.
HAD YOU REALIZED HOW FAR ALONG
THIS SCIENCE WAS WHEN YOU
STARTED ON THIS JOURNEY?
>> I HAD SOME IDEA ABOUT WHAT
WAS GOING ON IN UNIVERSITY AND
SCIENTIFIC LABORATORIES.
I KNEW SCIENTISTS WERE TINKERING
WITH GENES AND BRAINS, BUT IT
SURPRISED ME HOW FAR ALONG THIS
TECHNOLOGY WAS IN TERMS OF
TRICKLING OUT TO THE PUBLIC.
YOU CAN NOW BUY A GLO IN THE
DARK GENETICALLY ENGINEERED PET
OR REMOTE CONTROL A COCKROACH
WITH A KIT YOU CAN BUY ONLINE.
THAT WAS REALLY SURPRISED TO ME.
>> NOW, WE HUMANS HAVE BEEN
SHAPING ANIMALS TO OUR NEEDS FOR
THOUSANDS AND THOUSANDS OF
YEARS.
WHAT'S DIFFERENT ABOUT NOW?
HAS SCIENCE LEAPT AHEAD MUCH
FASTER THAN IT TOOK, FOR
INSTANCE, TO DOMESTICATE A COW.
>> IF YOU LOOK AT SOMETHING LIKE
THE DOG, WE'VE ALTERED THAT
IMMENSELY JUST THROUGH BREEDING.
BUT OUR MOLECULAR TECHNOLOGIES
ALLOW US TO MAKE CHANGES MORE
QUICKLY AND MORE TARGETED
CHANGES.
YOU CAN CHANGE ONE GENE INSTEAD
OF HAVING TO CROSS BREED AND
ALSO TO START TAKING GENETIC
MATERIALS FROM ONE SPECIES AND
PUTTING IT INTO ANOTHER SPECIES.
YOU COULD NEVER GET A JELLY FISH
AND A CAT TO INTEREEDRB BUT YOU
PUT IT INTO A CAT.LY FISH GENE
>> Suarez: AND THAT'S ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT PULLS YOU UP SHORT.
ANIMALS ARE USEFUL.
THEY'RE ENJOYABLE.
THEY'RE OUR COMPANIONS.
THEY'RE OUR FOOD.
ALL THESE DIFFERENT CATEGORIES
SEEM TO BE SPILLING OVER INTO
EACH OTHER.
NOBODY CONTEMPLATED, I DON'T
THINK, A GLOW IN THE DARK CAT.
>> RIGHT.
IT'S NOT SOMETHING THAT WAS
INTENDED TO BE A PET.
SCIENTISTS CREATED IT TO SORT OF
ANSWER SOME BASIC BIOLOGICAL
RESEARCH QUESTIONS BUT NOW THAT
IT EXISTS, IT COULD BECOME A
PET.
IT COULD BE USED IN ALL SORTS OF
DIFFERENT WAYS.
>> Suarez: ARE THERE PLACES
WHERE HUMAN BEINGS ALMOST
INSTINCTIVELY PUT ON THE BRAKES,
WHERE BREEDING TWO KINDS OF DOGS
FOR DESIRABLE TRAITS MIGHT BE
OKAY BUT TAKING SOMETHING OUT OF
A FISH AND PUTTING IT INTO A
PLANT MIGHT NOT BE OKAY OR OUT
OF AN ANIMAL AND PUTTING IT INTO
A HUMAN MIGHT NOT BE OKAY.
WHERE WE HAVEN'T EVEN REALLY
THOUGHT IT THROUGH BUT IT JUST
SEEMS WRONG?
>> WE HAVE EMOTIONAL RESPONSES
TO A LOT OF THESE DEVELOPMENTS.
I THINK THEY'RE PARTICULARLY
STRONG WHEN THE ANIMAL LOOKS
DIFFERENT.
SO THERE ARE SOME GENETICALLY
ENGINEERED ANIMALS.
YOU CAN TAKE A GENE FROM A
SPIDER AND PUT IT INTO A GOAT
BUT IT STILL LOOKS LIKE A GOAT.
BUT IF YOU START GETTING ANIMALS
LIKE CATS THAT GLOW GREEN OR
CYBORG INSECTS THAT HAVE WIRES
COMING OUT OF THEM, I THINK
THAT'S A LITTLE MORE EMOTIONALLY
TOUGHER TO DIGEST BECAUSE THEY
LOOK STRANGE.
>> Suarez: DO WE ALSO HAVE A
HIERARCHY, UNSPOKEN, UNTHOUGHT
OUT REALLY, WHERE THERE ARE
THINGS THAT WE MIGHT THINK IT'S
OKAY TO DO TO A COCKROACH, TO A
FISH THAT WOULD SUDDENLY MAKE US
FEEL PRETTY BAD IF WE SAW
SOMEBODY DOING THEM TO A HORSE
OR A DOG?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
WE HAVE HUGELY INCONSISTENT
VIEWS TOWARDS ANIMALS.
SOME ANIMALS OUR SOCIETY LOVES:
HORSES, DOGS, MAMMALS AND
PARTICULARLY PRIMATES, THINGS
THAT ARE CLOSER TO US.
WE GENERALLY TEND TO WANT TO
MESS WITH THEM LESS THAN THINGS
LIKE INVERT BRATS WHICH SEEM
FOREIGN AND MAYBE WE DON'T HAVE
AS MUCH SYMPATHY FOR THE INSECT
OR THE COCKROACH.
>> Suarez: WERE THERE TIMES WHEN
YOU WERE DOING THE RESEARCH --
BECAUSE YOU SAW A LOT OF THESE
ANIMALS ONE ON ONE -- WHERE YOU
SUDDENLY SAID TO YOURSELF, I
THOUGHT I WAS OKAY WITH THIS BUT
NOW I'M NOT SO SURE?
>> ONE OF THE BIG ONES FOR ME --
AND THIS IS MORE OF A THOUGHT
EXPERIMENT THAN SOMETHING I
ACTUALLY SAW -- BUT IT'S BEEN
SUGGESTED THAT MAYBE IF WE'RE
GOING TO KEEP EATING MEAT WE
SHOULD ENGINEER FARM ANIMALS
THAT DON'T FEEL PAIN.
LOGICALLY THAT SOUNDS LIKE A
GOOD IDEA.
IF WE'RE GOING TO BE USING THESE
ANIMALS FOR FOOD, THEN IT'S
BETTER FOR THEM IF THEY DON'T
FEEL PAIN.
BUT THERE'S SOMETHING
EMOTIONALLY IN ME THAT RESISTS
THAT IDEA.
IT SEEMS LIKE MAYBE GOING A STEP
TOO FAR.
IT SEEMS LIKE MAYBE IT'S
ALLEVIATING OUR OWN UNEASE WITH
WHAT WE'RE DOING.
I THINK I WORRY THAT IF IT GETS
TOO EASY TO USE ANIMALS, IF WE
ELIMINATE OUR OWN DISCOMFORT,
THEN MAYBE IT WILL GIVE US AN
EXCUSE TO DO MORE OF IT.
THAT'S SOMETHING THAT SORT OF
SITS UNEASILY WITH ME.
>> Suarez: YOU WALK US THROUGH
THE SCIENCE OF CLONING.
IN SOME DETAIL AND IN SOME
LENGTH.
IT TUSH TURNS OUT IT TAKES
THOUSANDS OF PROCEDURES IN SOME
OF THE EARLY CASES TO END UP
WITH ONE LIVING BEING.
AS WE GO DOWN THIS FRONTIER,
THERE'S GOING TO BE A LOT OF
OPERATIONS ON A LOT OF ANIMALS
THAT CAN'T CONSENT AND CAN'T
REFUSE.
>> CLONING IS AN INCREDIBLY
INEFFICIENT PROCEDURE.
THERE'S BEEN SOME DISCUSSION
ABOUT CLONES THEMSELVES AND
WHETHER THEY'RE HEALTHY OR HAVE
DEFECTS.
THEIR WELFARE... THERE ARE
WELFARE CONCERNS THERE.
BUT THE WELFARE ISSUE THAT
DOESN'T GET TALKED ABOUT MUCH,
AS YOU POINT OUT, IS TO CLONE
ONE PERSON'S PET DOG YOU HAVE TO
HARVEST EGGS FROM HUNDREDS OF
DOGS AND PUT DOZENS MORE THROUGH
THESE SURROGATE PREGNANCIES.
SO THERE'S A QUESTION ABOUT
WHETHER IT'S FAIR TO ENLIST ALL
OF THESE ANIMALS IN THE CREATION
OF A DUPLICATE OF SOMEBODY'S
PET.
>> Suarez: AS A FRIVOLOUS CASE,
AS MUCH AS PEOPLE DO LOVE THEIR
PETS, BUT IF WE CAN STOP FATAL
DIARRHEA AMONG INFANTS IN THE
DEVELOPING WORLD BY PUTTING
SOMETHING INTO GOAT'S MILK,
MAYBE THAT'S A DECENT USE OF
MILK THAT WE WERE GOING TO
CREATE ANYWAY FRANKLY DISWROO
ABSOLUTELY.
THAT'S ONE OF THE THINGS THAT I
REALLY ENCOURAGE PEOPLE TO DO IS
THAT BIOTECHNOLOGY CAN SEEM VERY
SCARY WHEN YOU THINK ABOUT IT IN
THE ABSTRACT.
BUT WHEN WE LOOK AT INDIVIDUAL
CASES ON A CASE-BY-CASE BASIS OR
PARTICULAR APPLICATIONS, SOME OF
THEM MAY BE MORE JUSTIFIED THAN
OTHERS.
AND IF IT'S A LIFE-SAVING
INTERVENTION EITHER FOR ANIMALS
OR FOR HUMANS, PERHAPS WE CAN
JUSTIFY SOME OF THIS
EXPERIMENTATION.
>> Suarez: WHAT'S NEXT?
I MEAN, ARE THERE SOME THINGS
THAT WE'RE CLOSE TO THAT ARE
GOING TO SHOCK PEOPLE WHEN THEY
COME TO FRUITION OR COME TO
MARKET?
>> I THINK THE AREA OF CYBORGS
IS A HUGE GROWTH AREA, SOMETHING
SCIENTISTS HAVE DONE SO THERE
ARE STEERABLE COCKROACHES AND
RODENTS BUT I THINK THIS MESHING
OF THE BIOTIC AND THE ABIOTIC IS
THE FUTURE.
WE'RE GOING TO SEE A LOT MORE
ANIMALS AND HUMANS THAT HAVE
ELECTRONIC COMPONENTS INTEGRATED
WITH THEIR BODIES.
>> Suarez: FRANKENSTEIN'S CAT.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Woodruff: ON OUR WEBSITE, YOU
CAN SEE MORE OFAY'S R
CONVERSATION WITH THE AUTHOR AS
WELL AS A SLIDESHOW OF MORE OF
THE STRANGE CREATURES DISCUSSED
IN THE BOOK.
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
THE UPROAR OVER GOVERNMENT
SURVEILLANCE EXPANDED TO
INTELLIGENCE CONTRACTOR EDWARD
SNOWDEN, WHO LEAKED THE
EXISTENCE OF TOP-SECRET
PROGRAMS.
HE SAID HE DID IT BECAUSE THE
PUBLIC IS OWED AN EXPLANATION.
AND BOMBINGS IN IRAQ KILLED AT
LEAST 57 PEOPLE, AS SHI'ITE-
SUNNI VIOLENCE SURGED AGAIN.
>> Woodruff: ONLINE, HITTING THE
ROAD WITH THE NATION'S POET
LAUREATE.
KWAME HOLMAN HAS THE DETAILS.
>> Holman: THE LIBRARY OF
CONGRESS HAS RE-APPOINTED
NATASHA TRETHEWAY TO BE THE
NATION'S CONSULTANT IN POETRY
AND FOR HER SECOND TERM, SHE
WILL JOIN JEFFREY BROWN FOR A
SERIES OF "ROAD TRIPS" ACROSS
THE NATION TO PLACES WHERE
POETRY IS PLAYS AN IMPORTANT
ROLE IN PEOPLE'S LIVES.
FIND THE DETAILS ON ART BEAT.
HOW CLOSELY TIED IS THE HEALTH
OF TREES TO THE HEALTH OF
HUMANS?
RESEARCHERS FROM THE U.S. FOREST
SERVICE LOOKED AT DATA THAT
SUGGESTS HAVING FEWER TREES MAY
BE BAD FOR YOU.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
WEBSITE, NEWSHOUR.PBS.ORG.
GWEN...
AND THAT'S THE "NEWSHOUR" FOR
TONIGHT.
ON TUESDAY, WE'LOKFORTS IN THE O
PASS COMPREHENSIVE IMMIGRATION
REFORM.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
THANK YOU AND GOOD NIGHT.